Class Outline.md, before:

##Spring Robotics Class Outline

Spring Robotics is a multi day course taught over the period of 11 weeks to students between the ages of 8 and 12. The primary goal of the course is to strengthen the students' understanding of LEGO robotics and FLL concepts in anticipation for 2016/17 FLL season.

###Course Materials for SpringRobotics

*	[Riley Rover](http://www.damienkee.com/home/2013/8/2/rileyrover-ev3-classroom-robot-design.html) (built from the [LEGO Mindstorms Education Kit](https://shop.education.lego.com/legoed/en-US/search/navSearchResults.jsp?categoryId=EDU_PRD_LINE_107&ProductLine=MINDSTORMS+Education+EV3))
*	iPads, Low Power Laptop or Desktop Computers (ideally 1 per student)
*	EV3 Code Included in this Repository
*	Research Templates Included in this Repository
*	iDevice with the GooseChase software installed

###Course Outline

####Week One
**Goals**: Introduce the color and ultrasonic sensors and solve a challenge using the two devices.

**Programs**

1.	"Tri-corder" for ultrasonic sensor distance measurements. (TODO)
2.	"Sonic Net" for the ultrasonic sensor presence mode detection. (TODO)
3. 	

**Session Guide**

1.	The week will have two GooseChase tracks; one each for the ultrasonic sensor and color sensor. Each GooseChase will demonstrate sensor modality, sensitivity, modes of operation, and a list of gotchas.
	* Color Sensor
		* Modality - Light
		* Sensitivity - Detects light intensity and seven colors: black, blue, yellow, red, green, white, and brown. Light intensity is measured from 0 to 100 (very dark to very light). The sample rate of the color sensor is 1 kHz/sec.
		* Modes of Operation - Color mode will return true (present) or false (not present) for one or more of the seven colors. Reflected Light Intensity mode measures the amount of light reflected back from a red lamp on the sensor. Ambient Light Intensity Mode measure the amount of light entering the sensor from the environment.
		* Gotchas - The sensor must be held in close proximity (but not touching) and at a right angle to the surface being measured. Light from the environment can affect measurements and care should be taken to shield the sensor from these effects in Color mode or Reflected Light mode.
	* Ultrasonic Sensor
		* Modality - Sound
		* Sensitivity - Range 3cm to 250cm (1" and 99"). Reading of 255cm (100") means that the sensor is not able to detect any object in range.
		* Modes of Operation - Measure mode will measure the distance to an object. Presence mode will detect the signal from a second US Sensor.
		* Gotchas - The sensor is less effective in detecting surfaces with "soft" surfaces or hard surfaces that are sharply angled. Both conditions will reduce the amount of sound that returns to the microphone.
2.	Discovery Stations for GooseChase Challenges
	* Color Sensor
	* Ultrasonic Sensor - A table with one EV3 brick and two ultrasonic sensors that can run in two modes. The first program measures distances. A block can be held at various angles and distances to test the US sensitivity. The second program has one US sensor in Presence mode. When an object is placed between the sensors a light on the brick will turn red to indicate a loss of signal.
3.	Suggested Table Challenges
	* Stop at Wall - Using the ultrasonic sensor have the robot drive forward until it's within 10 cm (~4 in).
	* Stop at Color - Using the color sensor have have the robot drive forward until it reaches a specific color.


**Stretch**

1.	Line following robot - have the robot follow a track (of a specific color) on the floor. The robot should ignore other colors and handle ambient light.

####Week Two
**Goals**: Introduce the concept of modular design and hot swappable components. 

**Programs and Builds**

1. Friction Wheel Hook Build (TODO)
2. Pinless Connector Concept Model
3.

**Session Guide**

1.	There are multiple concepts for modular design and hot swappable components. These include pinless design using hooks, motorless design using the robots inertia or motion, and quick connect concepts for transferring power. This session will cover all three.
2.	Pinless deign allows some attachments to be quickly removed and added using a bracket or frame on the base robot. The video [Quick Pinless Attachments for LEGO EV3 Competition Robots] (http://www.fllcasts.com/episodes/64-quick-pinless-attachments-for-lego-ev3-competition-robots-part-2) by FLLCasts demonstrates the concept.
3.	Not all movement needs to be directly driven by a motor. For example, in the video above (item 2) the builder uses inertia to "throw" a capture device when the robot comes to a stop. Another example was demonstrated by the Purple Flaming Trashcans during last year's FLL Competition when they used a wheel and friction to set a hook.
4. 

**Stretch**

####Week Three
**Goals**: Introduce the concept of power transfer with gear ratios.

**Programs and Builds**

1.
2.
3.

**Session Guide**

1.   There are a few simple concepts to master to effectively use gears in robot design.
	* 	Gearing down (small to large) increases torque (power) and decreases speed.
	*	Gearing up (large to small) decreases torque and increases speed.
	*	Even numbers of gears reverse the direction of rotation. Odd numbers of gears preserve the direction of rotation.
	*	The worm gear or beveled tooth gear can be used to change the axis of rotation perpendicular to the drive.

**Stretch**

####Week Four
**Goals**: Mid Season Challenge

**Programs and Builds**

1.
2.
3.

**Session Guide**

**Stretch**

####Week Five
**Goals**: Mid Season Challenge

**Programs and Builds**

1.
2.
3.

**Session Guide**

**Stretch**

Commit message:

Added Goosechase ideas to week 2. Updated week two design ideas.

Class Outline.md, after:

##Spring Robotics Class Outline

Spring Robotics is a multi day course taught over the period of 11 weeks to students between the ages of 8 and 12. The primary goal of the course is to strengthen the students' understanding of LEGO robotics and FLL concepts in anticipation for 2016/17 FLL season.

###Course Materials for SpringRobotics

*	[Riley Rover](http://www.damienkee.com/home/2013/8/2/rileyrover-ev3-classroom-robot-design.html) (built from the [LEGO Mindstorms Education Kit](https://shop.education.lego.com/legoed/en-US/search/navSearchResults.jsp?categoryId=EDU_PRD_LINE_107&ProductLine=MINDSTORMS+Education+EV3))
*	iPads, Low Power Laptop or Desktop Computers (ideally 1 per student)
*	EV3 Code Included in this Repository
*	Research Templates Included in this Repository
*	iDevice with the GooseChase software installed

###Course Outline

####Week One
**Goals**: Introduce the color and ultrasonic sensors and solve a challenge using the two devices.

**Programs**

1.	"Tri-corder" for ultrasonic sensor distance measurements. (TODO)
2.	"Sonic Net" for the ultrasonic sensor presence mode detection. (TODO)
3. 	

**Session Guide**

1.	The week will have two GooseChase tracks; one each for the ultrasonic sensor and color sensor. Each GooseChase will demonstrate sensor modality, sensitivity, modes of operation, and a list of gotchas.
	* Color Sensor
		* Modality - Light
		* Sensitivity - Detects light intensity and seven colors: black, blue, yellow, red, green, white, and brown. Light intensity is measured from 0 to 100 (very dark to very light). The sample rate of the color sensor is 1 kHz/sec.
		* Modes of Operation - Color mode will return true (present) or false (not present) for one or more of the seven colors. Reflected Light Intensity mode measures the amount of light reflected back from a red lamp on the sensor. Ambient Light Intensity Mode measure the amount of light entering the sensor from the environment.
		* Gotchas - The sensor must be held in close proximity (but not touching) and at a right angle to the surface being measured. Light from the environment can affect measurements and care should be taken to shield the sensor from these effects in Color mode or Reflected Light mode.
	* Ultrasonic Sensor
		* Modality - Sound
		* Sensitivity - Range 3cm to 250cm (1" and 99"). Reading of 255cm (100") means that the sensor is not able to detect any object in range.
		* Modes of Operation - Measure mode will measure the distance to an object. Presence mode will detect the signal from a second US Sensor.
		* Gotchas - The sensor is less effective in detecting surfaces with "soft" surfaces or hard surfaces that are sharply angled. Both conditions will reduce the amount of sound that returns to the microphone.
2.	Discovery Stations for GooseChase Challenges
	* Color Sensor
	* Ultrasonic Sensor - A table with one EV3 brick and two ultrasonic sensors that can run in two modes. The first program measures distances. A block can be held at various angles and distances to test the US sensitivity. The second program has one US sensor in Presence mode. When an object is placed between the sensors a light on the brick will turn red to indicate a loss of signal.
3.	Suggested Table Challenges
	* Stop at Wall - Using the ultrasonic sensor have the robot drive forward until it's within 10 cm (~4 in).
	* Stop at Color - Using the color sensor have have the robot drive forward until it reaches a specific color.


**Stretch**

1.	Line following robot - have the robot follow a track (of a specific color) on the floor. The robot should ignore other colors and handle ambient light.

####Week Two
**Goals**: Introduce the concept of modular design and hot swappable components. 

**Programs and Builds**

1. Friction Wheel Hook Build (TODO)
2. Pinless Connector Concept Model
3. Power Transfer Model (TODO)

**Session Guide**

1.	There are multiple concepts for modular design and hot swappable components. These include pinless design using hooks, motorless design using the robots inertia or motion, and quick connect concepts for transferring power. This session will cover all three.
2.	Pinless deign allows some attachments to be quickly removed and added using a bracket or frame on the base robot. The video [Quick Pinless Attachments for LEGO EV3 Competition Robots] (http://www.fllcasts.com/episodes/64-quick-pinless-attachments-for-lego-ev3-competition-robots-part-2) by FLLCasts demonstrates the concept.
3.	Not all movement needs to be directly driven by a motor. For example, in the video above (item 2) the builder uses inertia to "throw" a capture device when the robot comes to a stop. Another example was demonstrated by the Purple Flaming Trashcans during last year's FLL Competition when they used a wheel and friction to set a hook.
4. GooseChase suggestions for this week: a table that has a fixed number of parts and asks the student to build an attachment that will push a button. The basic frame of the robot is already available.

**Stretch**

1. At the table ask the teams to quickly (within 15 minutes) build a modular attachment that will collect one of the sea creatures. (Note that this will use the same swing arm concept demonstrated earlier in the video.)

####Week Three
**Goals**: Introduce the concept of power transfer with gear ratios.

**Programs and Builds**

1.
2.
3.

**Session Guide**

1.   There are a few simple concepts to master to effectively use gears in robot design.
	* 	Gearing down (small to large) increases torque (power) and decreases speed.
	*	Gearing up (large to small) decreases torque and increases speed.
	*	Even numbers of gears reverse the direction of rotation. Odd numbers of gears preserve the direction of rotation.
	*	The worm gear or beveled tooth gear can be used to change the axis of rotation perpendicular to the drive.

**Stretch**

####Week Four
**Goals**: Mid Season Challenge

**Programs and Builds**

1.
2.
3.

**Session Guide**

**Stretch**

####Week Five
**Goals**: Mid Season Challenge

**Programs and Builds**

1.
2.
3.

**Session Guide**

**Stretch**
